Merging 2 tables with mixed format, TRANSPOSE, SORT 

2. From the fixerup_2016 data set, create a narrow data set containing the employee id and
organization name. Use a data step and an array to accomplish this transformation. For
efficiency, only read the variables you need from the input data set. The resulting data set
should not contain any missing values for the organization name. You may find it handy later on
to have the index value from your array so keep it in the output data set. The resulting data set
should have 2243 observations and 3 variables. The first few values are shown below:

3. Sort the new data set in place so that it can be merged with the data contained in the charities
data set.

4. In your work library create a sorted copy of the charities data set for merging with the new data
set created in the previous steps.

5. Use match merge to create a new data set that combines the charity category with the
employee/organization data. Make sure no charities are included in the data when there have
been no contributions made to that organization. The resulting data set should have 2243
observations and 4 variables. The first few values are shown below:

6. Use the transpose procedure to transform this data set back into a wide data set of charity
categories that can be merged with the original contributions data set. The resulting data set
should have 424 observations and 11 variables. The first few values are shown below:
(NOTE: Not all columns are visible due to space limitations.)

7. Use a single data step to perform a match merge that combines the organization types with the
original fixerup_2016 data set and creates some summary variables. Apply the appropriate
labels to your new variables. The successful solution will most likely use some arrays. Create a
variable that contains the amount the employee contributed to Environment charities based on
the organization type value loaded from the charities data set. Likewise, create a variable for
the total the employee donated to Relief organizations. Create a third variable that contains the
total amount the employee donated to all charities. Create a fourth variable that shows the
percentage of the employee’s salary that was contributed. Label and format the percentage as
shown in the output data.

8. Print the descriptor portion and then the data portion of the final data set. When you print the
data portion, suppress the printing of observation numbers and print only the variables shown
in the output posted on eCampus.
